The Science Fiction Radio Show A commentary on science fiction today Presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
This is David Crews Daryl Lane and David Carson.
The subject of this show is space exploration. We're putting two limitations on
that subject. One, that the exploration be outside the solar system. And two,
that the story or novel we discuss involve the process of searching or exploring
primarily, not simply the result of the exploration. And especially with those
limitations, I think we have perhaps the purest of all science fiction themes or
plots. Man's history on this planet has been a process of searching,
discovering, then taming or civilizing. The discovery of the New World, for
instance, was the result of a deliberate act of search by various European
explorers, culminating with Columbus. The American West, as discovered and
mapped by Lewis and Clark, is a classic example of exploration. Now, space, or
our galaxy, the universe, is simply the next area to explore and discover and
tame. I think the importance and purity of the theme lies in the notion that
searching and discovering is the very essence of human nature. It's at the
center of our survival instinct. Without it, we wouldn't be human. We've
conquered the frontiers of Earth, and now we're ready to confront, we must
confront, what one influential science fiction production has called the final
frontier.
Star Trek first came on the air in 1966 and continued through 1969 with 78
episodes being completed for the series. The show had several major science
fiction authors writing for it, including Harlan Ellison, Theodore Sturgeon, and
David Gerrold. It would be hard to think of a better example of the space
exploration theme. I think Star Trek epitomizes that, because episode after
episode, you saw the crew members of the Enterprise confront aliens, all sorts
of problems in a hostile universe. But they kept going, their spirit, their
courage, their desire to go beyond mankind's limits almost, carried the show for
a long time. And I think it sort of is the essence of the space exploration
theme, for pure exploration's sake. It was a fairly popular show when it was on
the air, but it gained in popularity considerably after it went off the air and
went into syndication. And conventions are held, Star Trek conventions, and it
eventually spawned a movie. Well, fitting in with your parameters on space
exploration, we never saw the Enterprise going on a particular mission to do
something in particular. It was always just out there exploring with no
particular thing in mind. And whatever happened to it seemed to happen by
accident, or it just happened. They were out there, and an alien ship advanced
upon them, or they found some planet with a distress signal calling out. But
they were never really going to any particular place, as far as we were told. I
believe that really is kind of covered in the preamble to the show, where
William Shatner says they're on that five-year mission to explore new planets
and to discover what's out there. I think that has to be one of the reasons the
show is so popular, again, because simply it satisfies people's need for the
unknown, for the search, for the exploration, to seek something which is
mysterious, which is unknown. It simply caught the imagination, I think, of more
than pure science fiction fans. I think everybody was fascinated with that kind
of theme. I think this is especially shown in the episode called The Side of
Paradise. Yes, I think they did that theme a number of times, or not a number,
but every so often. I think that particular episode is the best expression of
it. But they advanced to this particular planet and beamed down, as they did on
their transporters. There was a particular plant on this planet that shot spores
whenever one of the crew members got near it. And these spores would seemingly,
well, cause a state of total happiness, total contentment in the individual. He
didn't have a sense of a goal. He didn't want to strive. He simply wanted to
stagnate. I'm reminded of the poem by Tennyson, "The Lotus-Eaters", where the
crew of Ulysses ate the lotus plant and wanted to stay on the island forever
without moving, without striving, without trying. Kirk, the captain, Captain
Kirk is one of the few who was not infected by the spores. And with the power of
his personality, his cleverness, he is able to overturn the influence these
spores have had on his crew members. But I think the significance of it is that
they are going to continue. They're not satisfied. They're not content. They
would have been perfectly happy to live the rest of their existence on this
planet. It was sort of an Eden, a paradise. But that's not enough for people.
They need a goal. They need something to strive for. Or they're not human. And
Kirk is able to get the crew members back to their original states, and the
Enterprise goes on. For an example of a novel that deals strictly in this type
of space exploration, let's turn to a novel called The Voyage of the Space
Beagle. It was written by A.E. Van Vogt in 1950. It's actually a collection of
four short stories that he tied together with a new character. The original
short stories were Black Destroyer and Discord in Scarlet, written in 1939, M33
in Andromeda, written in 1943, and War of Nerves, written in 1950. These four
stories he took and tied together with the theme of going out and exploring
space with these four episodes becoming four things that happened to the ship
and the people on it. In each of the stories, we meet a different kind of alien
and have to deal with it in a life-and-death situation. The first of these
episodes takes place when the crew lands on an alien planet and is discovered by
a creature named Coeurl. Coeurl is a cat-like creature, and he soon lures his way on
board the ship. The scientists are very eager to study him and see what his
physiological makeup is like, how his psychology has adapted him to this type of
planet, and generally what he is. Elliot Grosvenor, the main character that ties
the stories together, is somewhat suspect of Coeurl, and his suspicions are well
-founded. In an accident, they discover that Coeurl can control electrical
energies through his body. And once Coeurl discovers that the human beings have
learned this from him, he becomes immediately very fearful of them. He's a very,
very powerful creature, and they lock him inside a cage, but he manages to
negate the electronic lock and get out and starts horribly killing the crewmen.
And then running back to the cell and locking him back inside it, hoping to
create a panic on board the ship, the crew almost immediately discovers what is
happening and becomes a war between the crew and the creature. And in the end,
Coeurl leaves the ship by means of a lifeboat. Because he doesn't understand the
faster-than-light drive on the ship, he attempts to fly back toward his planet,
but he's traveling away from his planet faster than he is traveling toward it
when he leaves the ship. And even though he's flying toward his planet, his
planet still recedes into the distance, and he goes insane trying to figure this
out. The second episode in the book, which is one of the original short stories,
is about a race of aliens that are very bird-like, called the Riim, or the Riim
people. They have an entirely mental existence. They communicate by telepathy,
and they try to contact the space beagle with their mental emanations through
telepathy. And they're friendly. All they want to do is contact the ship, but it
creates havoc on the space beagle. And this mental power that enters the
spaceship drives some of the men mad. It causes psychological aberrations. It
brings out hostilities. It exaggerates certain mental conditions in the crew.
And Grosvener, the same one who was suspicious of Coeurl in the previous episode,
is able, with his specialized equipment, to mentally contact the Riim to let them
know what's happening and ask them to call off their attack, which is done, and
the Space Beagle is allowed to continue. The third section of the book deals
with a somewhat different type of alien. The Space Beagle is voyaging between
galaxies in intergalactic space where there is absolutely nothing. When all of a
sudden they come across the path of an alien who seems to be floating in this
intergalactic void. The alien had no hope of ever reaching one of the galaxies.
He was stranded out there when the ship just happened to pass by. And the alien
immediately taps some of the energy from the drive of the ship and stops the
ship dead in its tracks. The humans crawl out of the ship and fix the exterior,
and then they notice the alien floating right by the ship. The alien comes
aboard the ship after they try to capture him in a cage and immediately
recognizes the situation as being very advantageous to him. This creature is
extremely powerful, and he's from an ancient civilization that existed in the
previous cycle of the universe. When that universe exploded, this creature was
shot out into the place where they found him without any hope of gaining access
to a galaxy. When he meets the men, he is able to use them as host creatures or
bodies for his eggs in order to raise up more of these creatures. The Ixtl, as
the alien is called in the book, takes over part of the ship, and it's really a
race between him and the rest of the humans as to who's going to control. If the
humans allow him to gain the upper hand, he will eventually control all of the
galaxy that they're going to. The only way that the humans could rid themselves
of Ixtl was by using their mental agility and leaving the ship long enough that
they could impose a force field of energy that would kill the creature. The
creature found out what they were doing just in time to escape, and he got back
into his original fix floating out in the middle of intergalactic space with no
hope of ever gaining access to the galaxy as the humans went on to their next
episode. The last one involves a creature very difficult to describe. It's sort
of a cloud, a huge cloud creature without any particular name, but it feeds on
death. It started out as a very small, small organism. First of all, it fed on
the deaths of insects, then smaller animals and larger animals. It kept growing
all the while. And it's gotten so huge that it needs the deaths of creatures on
an entire planet to exist. So it's gained the power and the size and the
strength to terraform planets. And as the Space Beagle goes through a particular
system, they find that all of the planets they're passing are similar. They're
covered with tropical vegetation, with large primitive kinds of animals engaged
in conflict, which leads to many deaths that this creature is feeding on. The
scientists on the Space Beagle figure out what's happening and realize that
their own solar system is in great danger because this creature is expanding all
the time. And they're afraid it's going to come to their own solar system. So
they devise a plan whereby they start destroying the planets that the creature
is feeding on and lure him out into interstellar space where he's not able to
feed so that he will, we know, die away from the source of the death which
nourishes him. So again, through their cleverness, through their ingenuity, the
humans have triumphed over an alien which, when you come right down to it, is
much more powerful than they are. And I believe that typifies a lot of the
things in the novel in that the humans are always overcoming their adversaries
by means of their cleverness. They seem to outwit aliens that are much more
powerful than they are physically and in some instances by specialized powers
that they have. Coeurl could manipulate electromagnetic energies and Ixtl could
move through solid matter. But even with these abilities, the humans, by their
own ingenuity, could outwit their adversaries. I think we should say something
for the aliens, though. In most of the pulp novels of the time that this one was
written, we have so many of the bug-eyed monsters that are nothing more than
monsters. Here we have aliens that are truly intelligent and are fighting humans
on a much greater level than just physical terror. They're well thought out.
They have purpose and a plan. We can say that these are really better aliens
than what you would expect to find in most of the pulp novels of this type. I
think that change in the way the bug-eyed monsters were written about in science
fiction came back in the 30s with Stanley Weinbaum, Martian Odyssey. Asimov has
described that as the first science fiction story in which the aliens are not
simply humans in a strange form. They have their own reasons for existing. They
have their own ecology. They belong to a particular planet and they're a part of
that planet. I think all of the aliens in this particular book are realistic in
terms of having an ecology built around them and having a psychology, a
physiology which is not human. How shall we characterize this novel then? Is it
pulp fiction or is it something superior to that? Well, when Van Vogt started
writing the stories, he was writing in the pulp tradition. It was still in the
late 30s when he started to write these stories which became the Space Beagle.
But I think he goes beyond that. Even though he was trained in the pulp
tradition, I think he has more skill. He's more modern, perhaps under the
influence of the editor John Campbell. And he's able to go beyond the pulp
formulas. These are realistic aliens. The humans in the book are characterized
by realistic motives. They're not simply the plain hero types. They have their
quirks. They have their bad points the humans do. In fact, they all have to
overcome the bad parts of human nature before they can defeat the aliens
themselves. So I think this is a step beyond the pulp tradition, even though the
formulas and all the intentions of the story, I think, are the same as the early
pulp magazines. But Van Vogt is able to go beyond that.
For our second consideration, we turn to a novel by Poul Anderson written in
1970. Tau Zero is a special kind of a science fiction book. There's not very
many just like it. That's only one category that Anderson writes with, is the
kind of book that Tau Zero is. He writes almost anything. He writes pure
fantasy. He'll write so-called soft or social science fiction. But there's
nobody better at writing hard science fiction than Poul Anderson. I think Tau
Zero is perhaps his best example in that particular form because there's a great
deal of science in the book. And some readers might even think that it's a
little obtrusive if they don't understand some of the concepts of relativity and
the Bussard ramjet, for instance. The science in the novel actually makes it
extremely realistic. It's one of the more believable of the pure space epics
that's ever been written. The story is essentially that of a colony ship, a ship
full of people, I think about 50 people, who are traveling to a colony at a
nearby star to set up and start life there. And on the way, after they've gone
part of the way toward the star, the ship runs into a small nebula of gas, which
causes the ship to lose its power of deceleration. They cannot decelerate
without causing so much radiation harm that they would all be killed. The only
way that they can hope to exist is to keep on accelerating until they can get to
a place that is relatively free of gas, where they can go outside the ship,
outside of the protective barriers and shielding of the ship to repair that
deceleration device. The story that develops is that the ship cannot find a
place that is free enough of gas that they can go out and repair the ship, and
it keeps on accelerating until it's actually going through galaxies. But no
matter how fast they go, they can never go beyond the speed of light, because
Anderson, as we've said before, is extremely true to the scientific knowledge of
our day, and according to the knowledge that we have, faster-than-light travel
is impossible. So he has to dream up a method whereby this exploration trip can
go fast enough to get somewhere. And he's devised or he's used a ship called the
Bussard Ramjet to do this. The Bussard Ramjet is not a new idea. It was invented
somewhere in the middle of the century. The basic format is that the ship picks
up interstellar gas molecules by the use of a huge electromagnetic web of sorts,
a force field, if you will, that scoops up these interstellar particles and
shoots them out the back end. This provides reaction mass, which drives the ship
forward. The point is that the faster the ship goes, the more gas molecules it
supposedly will contact and shoot out the back end, thereby increasing its speed
more and more and more on a vicious cycle. The ship would be extremely
radioactive or radiative to the point where there would be needed extreme
shielding for any human beings to be able to ride the thing. I believe in the
works of Larry Niven, he had the same kind of a ship that was not habitable. He
had robots that used this ship, and everybody else had to come along on the slow
boats. Here, however, Poul Anderson has had this ship big enough and sealed well
enough that humans can ride it. The trouble is, when they hit that gas cloud,
that it not only destroyed their deceleration method, it also sped them up quite
a bit to the point where they were already past where they would have had to
stop and turn around and slow down to get to their original destination. The
speed of the ship is one of the basic problems the crew must overcome. The great
speed brings the theory of relativity into play. One of the basic concepts of
the theory of relativity is that the speed that time passes is relative to the
speed that an object is moving. If you have two ships traveling through space
with ship A traveling faster than ship B, time will be moving slower on ship A
than on ship B. In other words, the faster a ship moves, the slower time passes
on that ship relative to other slower-moving objects surrounding it. Everything
appears normal on the ship to the crew, and time seems to be passing faster on
objects traveling slower than the ship. As hours and days pass on the ship,
months and years pass on Earth, and the faster they travel, the greater this
time difference becomes. Eventually, the crew, while traveling between galaxies,
watches the universe collapse into a huge mass. This ties in the current,
currently accepted theories of the origin of the universe by most of the
scientific world. The Big Bang Theory, of course, in which the universe began as
one monomass of energy that explodes outward. There are two currently popular
views of this. One is that the universe would then continue to expand until it
eventually burnt itself out, and that would be all a one-time-only affair. Or
that the universe would again withdraw by gravitational force back into a
monomass and explode again, thus doing it numerable times, limitless times. This
is the cyclic theory, and this is what Poul Anderson portrays in Tau Zero. The
people on board the ship go so fast that the universe dies around them. The time
has passed exterior to the ship in great quantities. Of course, Earth and all of
its peoples, and assumably humankind, is long gone, and they are the only ones
left, and they're waiting out the result of this withdrawal of the universe back
into a monomass to see what happens. Hopefully, for them, it will explode again.
It's one of the things that Anderson tries to bring across is the incredible
amount of time that has passed while they've been on this incredibly fast flight
across the universe. Millions and billions of years have passed as the universe
contracts back down into one large monomass before it explodes back out and
creates new galaxies, new solar systems. And at the end of the novel, they
eventually land on one. They are able to slow down, and they land on one and
begin to colonize. And presumably, then, they will carry on the human race
simply from the 50 members on this ship that have survived into a new universe.
To me, that's one of the most fascinating of all journeys of exploration is to
see the death of a universe in the beginning of another one. That's fascinating,
the way Anderson treats that material. It's ultimately very optimistic. I think
it's the essence of the exploration theme, you know, to strive, to seek, to
never give up. And particularly with two characters on the book, I think we see
Anderson attempting to show two sides of human nature that allow it to persist
and to survive. You have a woman, Ingrid Lindgren, who was second in command on
the ship. She epitomizes feeling, emotion, love, compassion. We have Charles
Raymont, who is the, I guess you'd call him the policeman, the only military man
on board who is there to keep order. He is pure practicality, pure survival.
He'll do anything to survive. He's very an emotional, very practical man.
Together, those two are able to keep the crew intact. They're able to give it
hope. And they are the ones who are able to, well, allow the crew to survive
into this new universe where, you know, where humanity will keep going. The
Voyage of the Space Beagle and Tau Zero, I think we would call two of the more
classic treatments of the space exploration theme. But there are many and
ingenious methods, there's many varied ways that authors have come up with to
illustrate that particular theme. Always, I think, showing the desire of the
human spirit to escape any kind of restraint. I want a ride to the ridge where
the west commences and gaze at the moon till I lose my senses and I can't look
at hobbles and I can't stand fences. Don't fence me in.
One early example, I think, and probably still one of the more popular ones is
the idea that Heinlein illustrated in Orphans of the Sky, published from two
earlier short stories in 1941. He uses the device of a generation ship, which is
an artificial world, complete and self-sufficient, constructed and inhabited by
human beings, which is sent slowly toward the stars. The original members won't
live to arrive, of course, but their descendants will, many generations removed.
And that is one method of space exploration, although one which is a little
discouraging, I guess, to the original crew. In the film Dark Star, the
protagonists are traveling throughout our galaxy, discovering new solar systems
which have habitable planets on them and destroying all the unstable planets in
that system in order to make the system safe for colonization. And one other
rather unusual story we might mention is by Larry Niven. It's called Rammer. It
was a short story and then made into a novel, A World Out of Time. Here a
corpsicle, a person who has had himself frozen in order that he might be revived
later for medical treatment, I think the fellow had cancer or some such disease,
awakes into a future society where they want him for only one purpose or they
don't want him at all, and that's to pilot a starship. The fellow is amazed, but
he goes along with it because it's his only hope for life, takes the starship
and escapes away from the society that has programmed him to do their seeding of
planets that they want him to do and goes out on his own to explore the galaxy
or whatever he finds that meets his interest.
Space exploration is the cornerstone of postulative fiction, for the Earth is
well known and has become a very small place in a very big universe. If man is
to leave the Earth, as he has already begun to do, he will have to explore,
whether it's for the sake of exploring or for practical reasons of colonization
and exploitation or both. Although there are science fiction stories that do not
deal in off-Earth settings, the majority by far are based on the assumption of
space travel and exploration, as we try to imagine what could lie ahead for
humanity in the worlds of tomorrow.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.